[D1] D1 RR Documentation (#20922)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: src/content/docs/d1/best-practices/read-replication.mdx

	- `"mode": "disabled"` indicates read replication is disabled

## Read replica locations

Currently, D1 automatically creates a read replica in [every supported region](/d1/configuration/data-location/#available-location-hints), including the region where the primary database instance is located. These regions are:

- ENAM
- WNAM
- WEUR
- EEUR
- APAC
- OC

:::note
Read replica locations are subject to change at Cloudflare's discretion.
:::

## Observability

To see the impact of read replication and check the how D1 requests are processed by additional database instances, you can use:

- The `meta` object within the [`D1Result`](/d1/worker-api/return-object/#d1result) return object, which includes new fields:
  - `served_by_region`
  - `served_by_primary`
- The [Cloudflare dashboard](https://dash.cloudflare.com/?to=/:account/workers/d1), where you can view your database metrics breakdown by region that processed D1 requests.

## Known limitations

There are some known limitations for D1 read replication.

- Sessions API is only available via the [D1 Worker Binding](/d1/worker-api/d1-database/#withsession) and not yet available via the REST API.

> - TODO: smart placement

Reviewer: Should this be filled in?

---
title: Use read replication
pcx_content_type: concept
sidebar:
  order: 90

---

import { GlossaryTooltip, Details, GitHubCode, APIRequest, Tabs, TabItem, TypeScriptExample } from "~/components"

> D1 read replication can lower latency for read queries and scale read throughput by adding read-only database copies, called read replicas, across global regions closer to clients.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
D1 read replication can lower latency for read queries and scale read throughput by adding read-only database copies, called read replicas, across regions globally closer to clients.
```
A region is not global.

> Your application uses read replicas with D1 [Sessions API](/d1/worker-api/d1-database/#withsession). A Session encapsulates all the queries from one logical session for your application. For example, a Session may correspond to all queries coming from a particular web browser session. All queries within a Session read from a database instance which is as up-to-date as your query needs it to be. Sessions API ensures [sequential consistency](/d1/best-practices/read-replication/#replica-lag-and-consistency-model) for all queries in a Session.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your application can use read replicas with D1 [Sessions API](/d1/worker-api/d1-database/#withsession). A Session encapsulates all the queries from one logical session for your application. For example, a Session may correspond to all queries coming from a particular web browser session. All queries within a Session read from a database instance which is as up-to-date as your query needs it to be. Sessions API ensures [sequential consistency](/d1/best-practices/read-replication/#replica-lag-and-consistency-model) for all queries in a Session.
```

> To use read replication with the following Worker code and Sessions API:

Reviewer 2: This here should be reversed. First you deploy the worker project and then you enable replication (for now).

You don't have a database ID yet in step 1 since the database is created in step 2.

Author: Ah good catch. CC @vy-ton 

Do users have to activate it for each database? Or is there a way of enabling it for the whole account once?

> 1. Enable read replication on a D1 database

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Enable read replication on a D1 database:
```

```curl
curl -X PUT "https://api.cloudflare.com/client/v4/accounts/{account_id}/d1/database/{database_id}" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d "{"read_replication": {"mode": "auto"}}"
```

> 2. Select `Deploy to Workers`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Deploy the following worker using the `Deploy to Workers` button.
```

 * This will check if the error is because our main table is missing, and if it is create the table
 * and rerun the handler.
 */
async function withTablesInitialized(session: D1DatabaseSession, handler: () => Promise<Response>) {
	try {
		return await handler();
	} catch (e) {
		if (String(e).includes("no such table: Orders: SQLITE_ERROR")) {
			await initTables(session);
			return await handler();
		}
		throw e;
	}
}

async function initTables(session: D1DatabaseSession) {
	return await session
		.prepare(`CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Orders(
			customerId TEXT NOT NULL,
			orderId TEXT NOT NULL,
			quantity INTEGER NOT NULL,
			PRIMARY KEY (customerId, orderId)
		)`)
		.all();
}

async function resetTables(session: D1DatabaseSession) {
	return await session
		.prepare(`DROP TABLE IF EXISTS Orders; CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Orders(
			customerId TEXT NOT NULL,
			orderId TEXT NOT NULL,
			quantity INTEGER NOT NULL,
			PRIMARY KEY (customerId, orderId)
		)`)
		.all();
}
```

## Primary database instance vs read replicas

![D1 read replication concept](/images/d1/d1-read-replication-concept.png)

> When using D1 without read replication, D1 routes all queries (both read and write) to a specific database instance in [one location in the world](/d1/configuration/data-location/), known as the <GlossaryTooltip term="primary database instance"> primary database instance </GlossaryTooltip>. D1 request latency is dependent on the physical closeness of a user to the primary database instance. Users located further away from the primary database instance experience longer request latency due to [network round-trip time](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/cdn/glossary/round-trip-time-rtt/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using D1 without read replication, D1 routes all queries (both read and write) to a specific database instance in [one location in the world](/d1/configuration/data-location/), known as the <GlossaryTooltip term="primary database instance"> primary database instance </GlossaryTooltip>. D1 request latency is dependent on the physical proximity of a user to the primary database instance. Users located further away from the primary database instance experience longer request latency due to [network round-trip time](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/cdn/glossary/round-trip-time-rtt/).
```

> When using read replication, D1 introduces multiple, asynchronously replicated copies of the primary database instance which only serve read requests, called <GlossaryTooltip term="read replica"> read replicas </GlossaryTooltip>. D1 creates the read replicas in multiple regions throughout the world [across the Cloudflare network](/d1/best-practices/read-replication/#read-replica-locations).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using read replication, D1 creates multiple asynchronously replicated copies of the primary database instance, which only serve read requests, called <GlossaryTooltip term="read replica"> read replicas </GlossaryTooltip>. D1 creates the read replicas in multiple regions throughout the world [across the Cloudflare network](/d1/best-practices/read-replication/#read-replica-locations).
```

A user may be located far away from the primary database instance but close to a read replica. When D1 routes read requests to the read replica instead of the primary database instance, the user enjoys shorter read request response times.

> D1 asynchronously replicates changes from the primary database instance to all read replicas. This means that at any given time, a read replica may be arbitrarily out of date. The time it takes for the latest committed data in the primary database instance to be replicated to the read replica is known as the <GlossaryTooltip term="replica lag"> replica lag </GlossaryTooltip>. It is replica lag and non-deterministic routing to individual replicas that can lead to application data consistency issues, which Sessions API helps handle by ensuring sequential consistency. For more information, refer to [replica lag and consistency model](/d1/best-practices/read-replication/#replica-lag-and-consistency-model).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
D1 asynchronously replicates changes from the primary database instance to all read replicas. This means that at any given time, a read replica may be arbitrarily out of date. The time it takes for the latest committed data in the primary database instance to be replicated to the read replica is known as the <GlossaryTooltip term="replica lag"> replica lag </GlossaryTooltip>. Replica lag and non-deterministic routing to individual replicas can lead to application data consistency issues.
The D1 Sessions API solves this by ensuring sequential consistency.
For more information, refer to [replica lag and consistency model](/d1/best-practices/read-replication/#replica-lag-and-consistency-model).
```

Off-topic but unless our Markdown converter has this disabled, you can put sentences on new lines so that it's easier to review and edit shorter lines, and they will appear in the same paragraph in the rendered Markdown form.

:::note

> All write queries are still forwarded to the primary database instance. Read replication only improves the query response time for read requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All write queries are still forwarded to the primary database instance. Read replication only improves the response time for read query requests.
```

:::

| Type of database instance | Description                                                                                                                                       | How it handles write queries                                | How it handles read queries                               |
| ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| Primary database instance | The database instance containing the “original” copy of the database                                                                              | Can serve write queries                                     | Can serve read queries                                    |

> | Read replica              | A database instance containing an “almost up-to-date” copy of the original database, asynchronously updated against the primary database instance | Forwards any write queries to the primary database instance | Can serve read queries using its own copy of the database |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Read replica database instance             | A database instance containing a copy of the original database, asynchronously receiving updates from the primary database instance | Forwards any write queries to the primary database instance | Can serve read queries using its own copy of the database |
```

## Sessions API examples

> By using Sessions API for read replication, all of your queries from a single <GlossaryTooltip term="session">Session</GlossaryTooltip> read from a version of the database which ensures sequential consistency. This ensures that the version of the database you are reading is logically consistent with your queries when using read replicas.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By using Sessions API for read replication, all of your queries from a single <GlossaryTooltip term="session">Session</GlossaryTooltip> read from a version of the database which ensures sequential consistency. This ensures that the version of the database you are reading is logically consistent even if our queries are handled by different read replicas.
```

D1 read replication achieves this by attaching a <GlossaryTooltip term="bookmark">bookmark</GlossaryTooltip> to each write query within a Session. For more information, refer to [Bookmarks](/d1/reference/time-travel/#bookmarks).

### Enable read replication

> With REST API, set `"read_replication": "mode":"auto"` to enable read replication on a D1 database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the REST API, set `read_replication.mode: auto` to enable read replication on a D1 database.
```

> For REST API, use a [API token](/fundamentals/api/get-started/create-token/) with `D1:Edit` [permission](/fundamentals/api/reference/permissions/#account-permissions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the REST API, use an [API token](/fundamentals/api/get-started/create-token/) with `D1:Edit` [permission](/fundamentals/api/reference/permissions/#account-permissions).
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="cURL">
```curl
curl -X PUT "https://api.cloudflare.com/client/v4/accounts/{account_id}/d1/database/{database_id}" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d "{"read_replication": {"mode": "auto"}}"
```
</TabItem><TabItem label="TypeScript">
```ts
const headers = new Headers({
  "Authorization": `Bearer ${TOKEN}`
});

await fetch ("/v4/accounts/{account_id}/d1/database/{database_id}", {
	method: "PUT",
	headers: headers,
	body: JSON.stringify(
		{ "read_replication": { "mode": "auto" } }
	)
 }
)
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Disable read replication

> With REST API, set `"read_replication": "mode":"disable"` to disable read replication on a D1 database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the REST API, set `read_replication.mode: disable` to disable read replication on a D1 database.
```

> For REST API, use a [API token](/fundamentals/api/get-started/create-token/) with `D1:Edit` [permission](/fundamentals/api/reference/permissions/#account-permissions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the REST API, use an [API token](/fundamentals/api/get-started/create-token/) with `D1:Edit` [permission](/fundamentals/api/reference/permissions/#account-permissions).
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="cURL">
```curl
curl -X PUT "https://api.cloudflare.com/client/v4/accounts/{account_id}/d1/database/{database_id}" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \

>   -d "{"read_replication": {"mode": "disable"}}"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  -d "{"read_replication": {"mode": "disabled"}}"
```

```
</TabItem><TabItem label="TypeScript">
```ts
const headers = new Headers({
  "Authorization": `Bearer ${TOKEN}`
});

await fetch ("/v4/accounts/{account_id}/d1/database/{database_id}", {
	method: "PUT",
	headers: headers,
	body: JSON.stringify(

> 		{ "read_replication": { "mode": "disable" } }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		{ "read_replication": { "mode": "disabled" } }
```

	)
 }
)
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Check if read replication is enabled

> `GET` D1 database REST endpoint returns if read replication is enabled or disabled. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `GET` D1 database REST endpoint returns if the status of read replication. 
```

Author: Before I merge this change, for my own understanding, does the endpoint return info other than `auto` and `disabled`?

> For REST API, use a [API token](/fundamentals/api/get-started/create-token/) with `D1:Read` [permission](/fundamentals/api/reference/permissions/#account-permissions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the REST API, use an [API token](/fundamentals/api/get-started/create-token/) with `D1:Read` [permission](/fundamentals/api/reference/permissions/#account-permissions).
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="cURL">
```curl
curl -X GET "https://api.cloudflare.com/client/v4/accounts/{account_id}/d1/database/{database_id}" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem label="TypeScript">
```ts
const headers = new Headers({
  "Authorization": `Bearer ${TOKEN}`
});

const response = await fetch("/v4/accounts/{account_id}/d1/database/{database_id}", {
  method: "GET",
  headers: headers
});

const data = await response.json();
console.log(data.read_replication.mode);
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

- Check the `read_replication` property of the `result` object
	- `"mode": "auto"` indicates read replication is enabled
	- `"mode": "disable"` indicates read replication is disabled

### Start a Session without constraints

> To create a Session from any database version, use `withSession()` without any parameters, which will route the first query to any database instance, either the primary database instance or a read replica.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create a Session from any available database version, use `withSession()` without any parameters, which will route the first query to any database instance, either the primary database instance or a read replica.
```

```ts

> const session = env.DB.withSession() // synchronous

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const session = env.DB.withSession()
```
Doesn't add any value.

> const result = await session // query executes on either primary database or a read replica

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// query executes on either primary database or a read replica
const result = await session
```

Subsequent interactions on the application should continue using the same Session by passing the `bookmark` from the first query to subsequent requests. This guarantees that all interactions will observe information at least as up-to-date as the initial request, and therefore never show information older than what a user has already observed. The number of likes will be updated with newer counts over time with subsequent requests as D1 asynchronously updates the read replicas with the changes from the primary database.

```js
async function getLikes(postId: string, db: D1Database, bookmark: string | null): GetLikesResult {
  // NOTE: Achieve sequential consistency with given bookmark,
  //       or start a new session that can be served by any replica.
  const session = db.withSession(bookmark ?? "first-unconstrained");
  const { results } = session
	.prepare("SELECT * FROM likes WHERE postId = ?")
	.bind(postId)
	.run();
  return { bookmark: session.getBookmark(), likes: results };
}
``` */}

### Start a Session with all latest data

> To create a Session from the latest database version, use `withSession(first-primary)`, which will route the first query to the primary database instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create a Session from the latest database version, use `withSession("first-primary")`, which will route the first query to the primary database instance.
```

```ts
// synchronous

> const session = env.DB.withSession('first-primary') // synchronous

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const session = env.DB.withSession(`first-primary`)
```
Super nitpick, but stay consistent in what quotes each example uses. Ideally, the whole doc should either use `"` or `'` or the backtick consistently.

Author: Thanks for pointing out, that makes sense - I'll stick to using `"` for parameters from now on.

const result = await session // query executes on primary database
	.prepare(`SELECT * FROM Customers WHERE CompanyName = 'Bs Beverages'`)
	.run()
```

> - This approach is best when your application requires the latest database version. All queries in a Session ensure sequential consistency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- This approach is best when your application requires the latest database version initially, and then reads can be served by replicas. All queries in a Session ensure sequential consistency.
```

```ts
async function listBillStatements(accountId: string, db: D1Database): Promise<ListBillStatementsResult> {
	const session = db.withSession('first-primary');
	const { results } = (await session.prepare('SELECT * FROM bills WHERE accountId = ?').bind(accountId).run()) as unknown as {
		results: Bill[];
	};
	return { bookmark: session.getBookmark() ?? 'first-unconstrained', bills: results };
}

async function getBillStatement(accountId: string, billId: string, bookmark: string, db: D1Database): Promise<GetBillStatementResult> {
	// NOTE: We achieve sequential consistency with the given `bookmark`.
	const session = db.withSession(bookmark);
	const result = (await session
		.prepare('SELECT * FROM bills WHERE accountId = ? AND billId = ? LIMIT 1')
		.bind(accountId, billId)
		.first()) as unknown as Bill;

	return { bookmark: session.getBookmark() ?? 'first-unconstrained', bill: result };
}
``` */}

### Start a Session from previous context (bookmark)

> To create a new Session from the context of a previous Session, pass a `bookmark` parameter to guarantee that the Session starts with database state as of or later than the provided `bookmark`. `bookmark` could be saved in HTTP header from previous Session.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create a new Session from the context of a previous Session, pass a `bookmark` parameter to guarantee that the Session starts with a database version that is at least as up-to-date as the provided `bookmark`.
```

```ts
const bookmark = request.headers.get('x-d1-bookmark') ?? 'first-unconstrained';

const session = env.DB.withSession(bookmark)
const result = await session
	.prepare(`SELECT * FROM Customers WHERE CompanyName = 'Bs Beverages'`)
	.run()
// store bookmark for a future Session
response.headers.set('x-d1-bookmark', session.getBookmark() ?? "")
```

> - Starting a Session with a `bookmark` ensures the new Session has all the same context as the previous Session.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Starting a Session with a `bookmark` ensures the new Session will be at least as up-to-date as the previous Session that generated the given `bookmark`.
```

					?.split('=')[1] ?? 'first-unconstrained';
			console.log('bookmark', bookmark);
			const result = await getBillStatement('1', '1', bookmark, env.DB);
			return new Response(JSON.stringify(result), {
				status: 200,
				headers: {
					'Set-Cookie': `X-D1-Bookmark=${result.bookmark}; Path=/; SameSite=Strict`,
				},
			});
		}

		// To ingest data
		if (path === '/bill' && method === 'POST') {
			// Create bill
			const { accountId, amount, description, due_date } = await request.json();
			const session = env.DB.withSession('first-primary');
			const { results } = await session
				.prepare('INSERT INTO bills (accountId, amount, description, due_date) VALUES (?, ?, ?, ?) RETURNING *')
				.bind(accountId, amount, description, due_date)
				.run();
			const bookmark = session.getBookmark() ?? 'first-unconstrained';

			return new Response(JSON.stringify(results), {
				status: 201,
				headers: {
					// Set bookmark cookie
					'Set-Cookie': `X-D1-Bookmark=${bookmark}; Path=/; SameSite=Strict`,
				},
			});
		}
		return new Response('Not Found', {
			status: 404,
			statusText: 'Not Found',
		});
	},
} satisfies ExportedHandler<Env>;
``` */}

> ### Check where D1 request was processed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Inspect database instance information that processed a query
```

> To see how D1 requests are processed by the addition of read replicas, `served_by_region` and `served_by_primary` fields are returned by the `meta` object in a [D1 Result](/d1/worker-api/return-object/#d1result). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To see how D1 requests are processed by the addition of read replicas, `served_by_region` and `served_by_primary` fields are returned in the `meta` object in a [D1 Result](/d1/worker-api/return-object/#d1result). 
```

```ts

> function buildResponse(session: D1DatabaseSession, res: D1Result, startTimestamp: number) {
> 	return {
> 		d1Latency: Date.now() - startTimestamp,
> 
> 		results: res.results,
> 		servedByRegion: res.meta.served_by_region ?? "",
> 		servedByPrimary: res.meta.served_by_primary ?? "",
> 
> 		// Add the session bookmark inside the response body too.
> 		sessionBookmark: session.getBookmark(),
> 	};
> }

Reviewer 2: Why do we need this whole function here? It seems confusing and out of place.
```suggestion
const result = await env.DB.withSession()
	.prepare(`SELECT * FROM Customers WHERE CompanyName = 'Bs Beverages'`)
	.run();
console.log({
  servedByRegion: result.meta.served_by_region ?? "",
  servedByPrimary: result.meta.served_by_primary ?? "",
});
```

```

> - `served_by_region` and `served_by_primary` fields are present for all D1 remote requests, regardless of whether read replication is enabled. On local development, `npx wrangler dev`, these fields are `null`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `served_by_region` and `served_by_primary` fields are present for all D1 remote requests, regardless of whether read replication is enabled or if the Sessions API is used. On local development, `npx wrangler dev`, these fields are `undefined`.
```

> - You can also manually calculate the query latency using `Date.now()` before and after your query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Irrelevant.

## Read replica locations

Currently, D1 automatically creates a read replica in [every supported region](/d1/configuration/data-location/#available-location-hints), including the region where the primary database instance is located. These regions are:

- ENAM
- WNAM
- WEUR
- EEUR
- APAC
- OC

:::note
Read replica locations are subject to change at Cloudflare's discretion.
:::

## Observability

To see the impact of read replication and check the how D1 requests are processed by additional database instances, you can use:

- The `meta` object within the [`D1Result`](/d1/worker-api/return-object/#d1result) return object, which includes new fields:

>   - `served_By_Region`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `served_by_region`
```

>   - `served_By_Primary`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `served_by_primary`
```

- The [Cloudflare dashboard](https://dash.cloudflare.com/), where you can view your metrics breakdown by region that processed D1 requests.

## Known limitations

There are some known limitations for D1 read replication.

> - The lifecycle of a read replica is tied to the lifecycle of the primary database instance. For example, if the primary database instance is inactive, the read replicas are inactive too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Not useful to users.

- **Monotonic reads**: If you perform two reads one after the other (read-1, then read-2), read-2 cannot read a version of the database prior to read-1.
- **Monotonic writes**: If you perform write-1 then write-2, all processes observe write-1 before write-2.
- **Writes follow reads**: If you read a value, then perform a write, the subsequent write must be based on the value that was just read.
- **Read my own writes**: If you write to the database, all subsequent reads will see the write.

### Benefits of read replication

A system with multiple read replicas located around the world improves the performance of databases:

- The read throughput increases by distributing load across multiple replicas. Since multiple database instances are able to serve read-only requests, your application can serve a larger number of queries at any given time.
- The query latency decreases for users located close to the read replicas. By shortening the physical distance between a the database instance and the user, read query latency decreases, resulting in a faster application.

## Supplementary information

You may wish to refer to the following resources:

> - Blog: [Beta announcement & technical deep dive](https://blog.cloudflare.com/d1-read-replication-beta)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Blog: [Beta announcement & technical deep dive](https://blog.cloudflare.com/d1-read-replication-beta/)
```
